Good day. I'm Norman Wildberger. Today
we're going to look at the educational
aspects of this new approach to
arithmetic that I'm proposing,
which in some sense goes back to our first
few videos in this series many years ago now,
where we're thinking about a natural number
as being represented by a very simple kind of
representation of marks on a piece of bark or
strokes on a page. We're making that a little
bit more explicit by talking about M-sets of
units—unit somethings or marks—and we're basically
employing an M-set or multiset orientation to
define arithmetic, for example, addition like this
or multiplication like this. We've identified this
type "nat," which represents multisets of marks,
and I claim that this kind of arithmetic is in
some sense more fundamental and more basic than
our usual Hindu-Arabic arithmetic that we teach
young people involving the symbols 1, 2, 3, 6,
and so on. There is something more primitive and
more elementary about this, which I think makes
it possibly attractive for educators to try
to instill numeracy into very young people.
So today, we're going to be looking at
the issues of naming and ordering these
primitive natural numbers, and we want to
do it in a way that's largely independent
of some higher verbal facility requiring
understanding of these Hindu-Arabic numerals.
All right, so since we're human beings,
we like to talk and to express ourselves
verbally as well as by writing things
down. So it's natural for us to look to
having names for these simple kinds of
primitive natural numbers we're talking
about. So let's do that now, but perhaps in
a somewhat surprising and maybe naive way.
All right, so our first number is 0. This is this
empty multiset—just brackets with a bit of empty
space inside, okay? And we're going to give the
traditional name "zero" to that. And then the next
one is what we're going to call "one." So we just
have a single unit something inside our M-set;
we'll call that "one." And now, what about
this one? Well, the temptation, of course,
is to call it "two." That's already somewhat
sophisticated—the idea of introducing a new
name for every next number. What we're going to
do, rather, is to refer to this as "11." Now,
we could also call it "mark, mark" or "unit,
unit," but I think it's preferable to actually
use "11." This is in keeping with what a young
person might want to do. So technically speaking,
this is actually "one plus one"; it's actually
what you get when you take this one and you add
one. But let's give it a name, and let's call
it "11." And similarly, let's call this one
"111," and so on. You can see what the pattern
is. So this is, in fact, a base-one system,
if you like. We're really only going to be using
these two words: "zero" and "one," and everything
else is going to be built up from just repeating
this particular word. And this is very much in
keeping with our expressions, what we're writing
down—we're really only writing down two kinds of
things: either an empty space or a mark, and
we're possibly repeating the marks inside our
brackets. So the verbal simplicity is reflecting
the written simplicity—somehow it makes sense.
And of course, for a young person, learning
this kind of system is, relatively speaking,
a piece of cake. This is vastly simpler than
learning the standard Hindu-Arabic words:
one, two, three, four, five, six, seven,
eight, nine, ten, and then eleven, and
then twelve, thirteen, and fourteen. That's
all reasonably complicated and takes a fair
amount of repetition and learning. In fact,
it's not really logically that clear, is it?
There's something very logically clear about this
system, even though it may be somewhat primitive.
So, for example, let us look at
the name of this natural number,
okay? What is its name? It is "111111." That
is the name of this natural number. Now,
we've talked about how the original motivation for
natural numbers probably arose in the context of
wanting to measure how many of a certain thing
there were out in the real world—maybe antelope
at a waterhole. So this is a fundamental usage of
numbers: to measure the size of, well, what we're
calling M-sets or multisets—collections
of stuff out there in the world.
So, for example, here is an M-set which consists
of these letters, okay? So even a student who
perhaps hasn't learned how to read can still
understand that these are things called letters,
and we can count them in the following
way: we can just go through the letters,
and wherever there's a letter, we can make
a mark. So for this letter, we make a mark,
then another one, another one, another
one, one more, one more, one more,
one more. So what we've done is we've replaced
each of the objects in this collection that we're
interested in with one of our simple unit marks.
And we can say that what we've done then is to
measure the size of this collection or M-set. So
the size of this M-set is this natural number.
Now, M-sets in real life don't necessarily have to
come in these kinds of linear bracketed forms like
this. So here might be another kind of example
that you could give a young person. So here is
a box of some kind, and it has certain objects
in it, and the objects are of the pleasant kind,
and we might be interested in how big this box is
in the sense of how many things are there in it.
So the young person, understanding the strategy,
would do the following: they would say, "Well,
what we're going to do is we're going to just
create a number out of the box by replacing
the objects in here with our unit marks." So
I'm going to make a mark there for this thing,
a mark there for that heart, a mark there for
that diamond, another mark there for that diamond,
let's see, that rectangle gets a mark,
that heart gets a mark, that rectangle
gets a mark, and there's a square over there—that
gets a mark, right? So I've replaced this multiset
of objects with a multiset of marks. It's a
simplification. So measuring the size of something
is some kind of simplification where you just
replace objects with our fundamental unit marks.
Now, this isn't really in the standard form
for a natural number, so we would want our
student to express this more in keeping with
our terminology. So then they would be obliged
to organize these marks, right? To write them
down in the sequential fashion. And so they'd
have to do this in some kind of a reasonable way
so they don't get confused—maybe that one there,
then that one, that one, that one,
that one, that one, that one, that one,
and then we close the set. So let's observe
that counting is actually not really involved
here. It's not the case that we are counting
how many of these things there are—that we
have a prior verbal system for ordering numbers.
Rather, what we're doing is we're just replacing
objects with marks and then organizing them in
a linear fashion, okay? So it's really prior to
what we usually think of as counting—some kind of
more simple, basic, primeval kind of operation.
So to measure an M-set, we just replace
each of its elements with a unit something
or mark—in other words, one of our little
strokes. That's what measuring M-sets means.
Now, doing arithmetic with numbers is so familiar
to us and ingrained in us that sometimes we're not
even aware of relatively basic distinctions. And
a very important distinction is that there are at
least two different kinds of roles that numbers
play when we're using them to describe the world
around us. So numbers, as we've seen, are used
to measure the sizes of collections or M-sets,
but they can also be used for counting in the
sense of ordering. And mathematicians have
names for these different kinds of usages. So we
talk about cardinal numbers and ordinal numbers.
So this is somewhat fancy terminology that
refers to numbers being used in the context of
measuring sizes of M-sets typically, and here the
ordinal numbers refer to counting the position in
a list. We have something ordered, and you want
to refer to a particular element in that order.
So let's give two examples of these different
usages of numbers. So a cardinal number usage
is one that we've already been looking at.
So here is an M-set, the M-set ,
and we're interested in measuring how big that
M-set is. So that's a cardinal number usage. So
we're measuring that set, and we're getting
that the answer is the number "1111," okay?
So now here's an ordinal number usage, where we're
referring to not an M-set, which is a collection
of stuff, but we're actually interested in a list.
So here's a list. You can tell it's a list because
it has square brackets and it has commas, and
so the commas are telling us that in this case,
these elements are ordered. We're starting with
A, and then B, and then C, and then D. Over here,
there were no commas—this is an unordered
multiset. If we interchange the order,
things would not change. This is a list—the
order does matter. So the question here is,
what is the "1111" element of this list? The
"1111"—we're talking about trying to find
the element, not which is the one element, and
not the "11" element, but the "1111" element,
and we identify that that is actually C. So
this usage of the number "1111" is subtly
but importantly different from the usage of this
number "1111." Here, we're measuring the size, the
largeness of a collection or an M-set, and here
we're specifying the position inside some ordered
structure, inside some kind of sequence, which
for us is best captured by the idea of a list.
Now, this ordinal usage of numbers connects
naturally with a natural order on natural
numbers. So we originally defined natural numbers
just in terms of what they are—a natural number is
an M-set of marks, and we had lots of different
kinds of M-sets. Now we're observing that our
natural numbers can actually be arranged in a
very efficient and natural way. We can list them;
we can put them in a sequence starting from the
smallest ones and working our way step by step,
concretely, one at a time, to bigger
and bigger numbers. And here, of course,
is this sequence—the ordering that we're
talking about, where we're starting with,
in this case, the empty M-set, or 0,
and then we have the M-set "1," and
then "11," and then "111," "1111," "11111,"
and "111111." And we can keep going. So here,
the three dots refer to the fact that we can
go from one to the next by adding one—that is
the systematic way of going from one of
these to the next one, we're adding one.
So that leads naturally to this terminology, which
is useful: the idea of a successor of a natural
number. So if "K" is a natural number—let's
introduce some abstract letter to represent
it—then its successor is, we might introduce
this notation, "K prime." That means "K plus
1." So this is the number one, which consists of
a single mark, okay? What's inside here is not
the number one—there's a mark inside, that unit
something. This whole thing is the number one.
So, for example, here's a number—the
number is "111," and its successor is,
well, what you get when you take the number
"111" and you add one, you add a mark,
you get "1111." So that's a successor—that's
the successor of that. And that's really
what generates this sequence or
this ordering of natural numbers.
Okay, so there's now a theorem here that emerges,
which is a pretty obvious theorem in some ways,
but it's probably useful to lay it out concretely,
and let's call it the "Theorem of Induction."
So the theorem of induction is that any natural
number can be obtained by starting with the empty
M-set, 0, then possibly taking successors. So
we've seen that we can start with 0, and then we
can take a successor, we can get one, and then we
can get "11," and then we get "111," and then we
get "1111," and then "11111." What we're stating
now is that if we had any natural number—someone
writes down the natural number—that it actually is
in this sequence somewhere. That if we start with
zero, add one, add one, add one, eventually,
at some point, we will get to that natural
number that we've written down. This sequence
does not miss some natural number somewhere.
Okay, what is the proof case? It's close to
being intuitively obvious, but if we had to
write something down to convince some, maybe young
person, we might say the following: if the natural
number that we're starting with is 0 itself, well,
then it is of this form—it's contained in this
prescription because it's the first thing that
we're starting with. If it's not 0, that means it
contains a mark, and so it can be written as the
successor of a number with fewer marks. In other
words, it can be written as the successor of the
number that we get by removing that mark. And we
can then continue to do that—we can continue to
find a number of which that is the successor by
again removing a mark. So we can go from a natural
number that's written down, we can find a finite
sequence of numbers, each of which the one that
you have is a successor of, and then eventually we
get back to the empty set. That's a consequence of
the fact that we've written down a finite number
of marks—we've written down a specific number of
marks, and so we're going to rub them off one at
a time. Well, that's only going to take a certain
number of steps—namely, the number of marks—and
then eventually we will get down to the empty set.
So it's a kind of argument that says, "All right,
given the natural number, we can get back to the
empty set in this very concrete, prescribed way."
All right, so for example, here is a
number—it's the number "111111." And we can ask,
can this actually be obtained from the empty set,
or 0, by taking successors? Well, we would answer
that question one way, I think. The natural way is
to take the number that we're given and to write
it as a successor of something—we write it as a
successor of what we get by removing one of the
marks. So this is the successor of "11111." And
similarly, this thing is the successor of "1111,"
what we get by removing one of the marks. This is
the successor of "111." This is the successor of
"11." This is the successor of "1." And this
is the successor of "0." So the answer is,
of course, yes, and we've sort of clearly laid
out then what is the sequence that we have to
go through to go from original 0 to the number
that we're interested in. We have to go back up
this staircase that we've just gone down.
So we start with 0, and then we go to 1,
and then "11," then "111," and then "1111,"
and then "11111," and then the next step,
"111111," we get to the number that we've
started with. So that, yes, this number
actually is in the sequence or the listing
or the natural ordering of natural numbers.
So when I was younger, there was a very popular
TV show for young people called "Sesame Street."
Maybe it is still around, with lots of funny
monsters and characters and so on. But they
also had a lot of training or familiarization
for students with respect to numbers. So there
would be a lot of signs flashing around
like "1, 2, 3," the Hindu-Arabic symbols,
and, you know, one plus two is three, and three
plus four is seven, and so on. And I think that's
great because it introduces young people to the
idea of numeracy and being familiar with natural
numbers. But I'm not so convinced that these
are the first steps that young people should
go down. I think it's possible that this kind
of more primitive number sense, where we just
deal with natural numbers in this primitive
form—"1111," "111111," and so on—that it's
somehow simpler and more in keeping with trying
to imbue a numerical sense into young people,
independent of a verbal facility that may only
come later. So, in principle, I think working
with these kinds of natural numbers could actually
happen at a much earlier age—maybe two years old,
three years old. We can already get young
people doing arithmetic in this context.
So here are some exercises that we might
give students in this direction. Okay,
so for example, they might want to find the sizes
of these M-sets. So here are some collections,
and we want to write down what their sizes are.
And the important thing is that the students do
not yet need to know how to count, okay? They can
do this before they have learned to count. They
can write down marks for each one of these things,
matching up the objects with marks, very much the
same way that a primitive person at a waterhole
might match up antelope with X's on a piece of
bark. They can make computations like this: they
can calculate what is "111" plus "111111," and
they can write down the answer, and then they can
tell you what the answer is in the sense of, "The
answer is '1111111.'" They can do multiplication.
They can do addition with more than just two
things. So we can get a three-year-old to
understand what's being asked here and to actually
make computations. We can ask them to find the
successor of some number like this. We can get
them to explore the ordinal aspects of numbers.
We can ask them for the "11111" element of this
sequence. We can ask them to verify some basic
law of arithmetic—what is "111" plus "111111"? Is
that the same as "111111" plus "111"? In other
words, if you interchange these two things,
do you still get the same thing? They can verify
that if you do this one first, and then you do
this one on separate pieces of paper, and then you
compare, lo and behold, you get the same thing.
All right, so these are just indicative kinds
of examples that I think suggest that it might
be interesting to try to get young people
engaged in numerical intuition and actual
computation at a very early age, at an age
that's before they normally do the kind of
Hindu-Arabic arithmetic that they currently
do. Logically and maybe pedagogically,
this primitive natural number arithmetic really
ought to come before the Hindu-Arabic arithmetic.
In our next video, we do want to turn our
attention to the Hindu-Arabic arithmetic,
which of course is very important and is
practically much more sensible than this is.
But still, it's important for us to distinguish
between these two kinds of things. So we want
to make some space between this primitive
natural number arithmetic and the Hindu-Arabic
arithmetic. That is for several reasons, one
of which is that when we're talking about very,
very big numbers, then the Hindu-Arabic
system is actually much more powerful,
but also correspondingly more problematic
to deal with than the primitive one. So
we're going to have to explore not just
the pros but also the cons of moving from
primitive natural numbers to Hindu-Arabic
ones. It's a bit of a trade-off, actually.
I hope you'll join me for that. I'm
Norman Wildberger. Thanks for listening.